PR: Spyder Workshops for research and finance (#261)
spyder-ide/spyder-docs: doc/workshops/scientific-computing.rst

.. _The Python Tutorial: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/

You will also need to have Spyder installed. More information about installation in :doc:`installation guide<../installation>`.

.. important::

   Spyder now offers :ref:`standalone_installers_ref` for Windows and macOS, making it easier to get up and running with the application without having to download Anaconda or manually install it in your existing environment.
   While we still support Anaconda, we recommend this install method on those platforms to avoid most problems with package conflicts and other issues.

==============
Learning goals
==============

After completing this workshop, you should be able to:

* Apply the scientific method to answer questions related to psychometric variables
* Understand how to use Spyder's built-in scientific computing tools

===============
Learner profile
===============

This workshop is intended for people who want to learn how to answer questions scientifically from a dataset. We have also designed it to serve as a tutorial for learning how to use Spyder as a research tool.

===============
Prior knowledge
===============

* Basic level of Python

> * Intermediate level of Statistics (hypothesis testing, ANOVA, correlation)

Author: Fixed.

=====
Intro
=====

In this workshop we will explore a data set and use it to answer some questions using the scientific method.

Why do scientific research with Python?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python is a mature programming language that has been chosen by much of the scientific community to support the research process. And there are a few reasons for this:

* It is versatile and easy to learn and use
* Multiple ways to handle inputs and outputs. No matter what format your data is in, in Python there is always a way to import it (and export it in the format of your choice)
* It is interpreted. You don't have to write code from start to finish to see partial results. This makes it especially easy and fast to explore data
* It has built-in support for scientific computing tasks: SciPy, NumPy, and a vast number of other libraries created by and for scientists
* It is the most widely used programming language for Machine Learning (including Keras and TensorFlow)
* It has excellent libraries for plotting

> * Integration with Jupyter Notebooks and implementations of these in the cloud (Binder, Google Colab)

Author: Fixed.

.. image:: ../images/plots/plots-save.gif
   :alt: Spyder plots pane showing saving a plot.

Code Analysis Pane (share a stylish code!)
------------------------------------------

Wouldn't it be great to have a tool to be able to detect code errors, stylistic problems, bad practices, inconsistencies and the like? This is precisely the task of :doc:`Code Analysis Pane<../panes/pylint>`. Your code can run, but if you are going to share it with other researchers it would be great if it is both readable and neat as well.

This tool analyzes the code and gives as a result a summary of the issues that can be improved in your code, as well as a global numerical evaluation of the code quality.

.. image:: ../images/pylint/code-analysis-standard.png
   :alt: Spyder Pylint pane, showing numerous issues discovered in a file

We will use this tool near the end of the workshop, to improve the style of the code.

spyder-notebook (the versatility of a notebook inside Spyder)
-------------------------------------------------------------

================
Preparation work

> ================

Author: I didn't use bullet points, but I did summarize everything in this introduction and eliminated the images. What do you think?

.. code-block: python
   
   data.d_age.plot.hist(bins=25, alpha=0.5)

.. image:: images/workshop-2/age-histogram-1.png
   :alt: Age histogram with Pandas

Frequency distributions come in different sizes and shapes. The shape of a histogram reveals very interesting things about the data. A symmetrical, bell-shaped histogram might indicate that the distribution is normal (most of the scores are close to the center of the distribution). In the age histogram, you can see that it has a "tail" to the right (towards the older ages). Technically this is called "positively skewed". It is also noticeable that it is somewhat pointy (positive kurtosis or leptokurtic). These two things could suggest that age is not a random variable.

Although we can create the histogram directly from the dataframe, we are going to use a Python library called Seaborn to do the same, because this library will allow us to do more interesting things later.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   sns.histplot(data.d_age, kde=True, bins=25)
   plt.show()

> We call ``sns.histplot()`` with three arguments. The first one (``data.d_age``)is a Pandas Series with the **quantitative** variable we want to plot. The second (``kde=True``) adds a curve showing an ideal model of the age distribution (using a method called *Kernel Density Estimator*). And the third one (``bins=25``) indicates that we want 25 bins in the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We call ``sns.histplot()`` with three arguments. The first one (``data.d_age``) is a Pandas Series with the **quantitative** variable we want to plot. The second (``kde=True``) adds a curve showing an ideal model of the age distribution (using a method called *Kernel Density Estimator*). And the third one (``bins=25``) indicates that we want 25 bins in the graph.
```

.. image:: images/workshop-2/age-histogram-2.png
   :alt: Age histogram with Seaborn

> The second line (``plt.show()``) is intended to show all the figures not displayed so far. If you have any doubts about how to utilize something, you can use the help() function in the console. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second line (``plt.show()``) is intended to show all the figures not displayed so far. If you have any doubts about how to utilize something, you can use the ``help()`` function in the console. For example:
```

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   
   help(plt.show)

But you can also take advantage of the Help Pane included in Spyder to get on-screen help:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/help-pane-for-plt.show.png
   :alt: plt.show() help in Spyder's Help Pane

With Seaborn, we can add a line representing the mean for the histogram. To do this we will use the ``axvline()`` method and add a text with the value of the mean with ``text()``. ``min_ylim`` and ``max_ylim`` are used to mark the position of the text.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   sns.histplot(data.d_age, kde=True, bins=25)
   plt.xlabel('Age')
   plt.axvline(data.d_age.mean(), color='k', linestyle='dashed', linewidth=1)
   min_ylim, max_ylim = plt.ylim()
   plt.text(data.d_age.mean()*1.1, max_ylim*0.9,
            'Mean: {:.2f}'.format(data.d_age.mean()))
   plt.show()

.. image:: images/workshop-2/age-histogram-2.png
   :alt: Age histogram with mean line

We know the extent of the dataframe and we have seen how to explore a quantitative variable. Now let's move on to a qualitative variable. The ``columns`` attribute shows a list of column names in the dataframe. We also know that demographic variables are prefixed with "d_", so we can look for variable names that correspond to this prefix.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   demograph = [v for v in list(data.columns) if v.startswith("d_")]

> In the Variable Explorer you will see a new variable "demograph". If you double click on it you will see a list of the demographic variables in the dataset. At the end of the list you will see a value "d_religion_seriosity". If you right click on it, several options will appear on the screen. You can rename the column, delete it or insert a new one. Let's click on "Copy" to copy the column name into memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Variable Explorer you will see a new variable "demograph". If you double click on it you will see a list of the demographic variables in the dataset. At the end of the list you will see a value ``d_religion_seriosity``. If you right click on it, several options will appear on the screen. You can rename the column, delete it or insert a new one. Let's click on "Copy" to copy the column name into memory.
```

In the IPython Console, type ``data.`` and then copy the column name. Type a period at the end (no spaces) and hit tab. You should see something like the following:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/console-auto-completion.png
   :alt: IPython Console auto-completion

You can then see a list of all relevant methods and attributes of the class. Right at the end you will see a "value_counts" that could be used to summarize the variable. It is a method so it must end in parentheses:

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   data.d_religion_seriosity.value_counts()

   # but not too serious about it     11142
   # and laughing about it             7307
   # and somewhat serious about it     5372
   # and very serious about it         3290
   # Name: d_religion_seriosity, dtype: int64

In addition to demographic and profile variables, the dataset includes responses to questions on a variety of topics. These questions are coded with a prefix "q" followed by an integer. The text of the questions is stored in a file called "question_data.csv" (which you can download here). [ADD LINK TO DOWNLOAD question_data.csv]

We can examine this file in the Variable Explorer.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   question_data = pd.read_csv("question_data.csv", sep=";")

> Just double click on "question_data" in the Variable Explorer to display each question aligned with its code ("q" + number).

Reviewer: In general, using "just" is not advised :) [You can read more about this here](https://software-carpentry.org/blog/2015/03/teaching-tips.html)

```suggestion
Double click on "question_data" in the Variable Explorer to display each question aligned with its code ("q" + number).
```

A hypothesis is an statement that can be tested by means of the scientific method. They must be verifiable using empirical evidence or data. For example, *green is the best color* is not a hypothesis since it cannot be proven or disproven.

With respect to the above theory of a person's religiosity, to explore it we should find two variables to relate. The first variable would be related to a **person's religious feeling**. The second variable would be related to a person's **ability to solve problems and situations**.

The OKCupid dataset has useful variables that we can use to investigate this theory. For example, question q41 (*How important is religion/God in your life?*) provides information about a person's religious sentiment. The second variable is a slightly more difficult to come up with, as it is somewhat more complex. Fortunately, the researchers who collected the dataset have also selected 14 questions that can serve as a proxy for a cognitive ability test. This selection of questions can be found in the file "test_items.csv". [ADD LINK TO DOWNLOAD test_items.csv]

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   
   test_items = pd.read_csv("test_items.csv")

So, let's try to see if there is any evidence in the OKCupid dataset to support the following hypothesis:

*Nonreligious groups (atheists/agnostics) would score higher on tests of cognitive ability*.

==============
Build the test
==============

We already know which questions will be part of the cognitive ability test. Now we are going to process that data to obtain the scores for each person.

Make a copy of the original dataset:

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   ca_test = data.copy()

The next step is to find the correct answer to each test question (these answers are in ``test_items``).

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   right_answers = []
   for i, j in test_items.iterrows():
       right_answers.append(j.iloc[j["option_correct"] + 2])
   test_items["right_answer"] = right_answers

> The correct answers have been stored in the test_items dataframe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The correct answers have been stored in the ``test_items`` dataframe.
```

> Next, we will indicate, in the ca_test dataframe, whether the person answered correctly to each question selected in the cognitive ability test. These answers will be entered as a boolean in new variables with the prefix "resp_" followed by the corresponding question code. The Boolean is calculated with the function ``lambda row: row[q] == a, axis=1``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we will indicate, in the ``ca_test`` dataframe, whether the person answered correctly to each question selected in the cognitive ability test. These answers will be entered as a boolean in new variables with the prefix "resp_" followed by the corresponding question code. The Boolean is calculated with the function ``lambda row: row[q] == a, axis=1``.
```

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   for i, j in test_items.iterrows():
       q = "q" + str(j["ID"])
       a = str(j["right_answer"])
       try:
           ca_test.dropna(subset=[q], inplace=True)
           ca_test["resp_" + q] = ca_test.apply(lambda row: row[q] == a, axis=1)
       except:
           print(f"{q} not found.")
           pass

.. note::

>    Some test_items questions are not in the data, but don't worry about that. We use ``try... except`` to ignore these errors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Some ``test_items`` questions are not in the data, but don't worry about that. We use a ``try... except`` block to ignore these errors. 
```

I understand, but I think we may need a quick justification for this. Otherwise the user may be left wondering if they misunderstood something.

Reviewer: Ah! I think this is explained below. I'm wondering then why we have the above sentence - it may be better to include this observation in the "important" block below.

   
.. important::

   Answering these questions was optional, so many OkCupid site users did not answer all of them. So we have removed from the records the users who did not answer the 14 questions we have chosen for the cognitive ability test. This reduced the sample size considerably. There are other ways to avoid this reduction, but they are outside the scope of this workshop. 

We want to sum the correct answers for each person, but some integer results were stored as strings, so let's fix that:

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   ca_test.q18154 = pd.Series(ca_test.q18154, dtype="int")
   ca_test.q18154 = pd.Series(ca_test.q18154, dtype="string")
   ca_test.resp_q18154 = ca_test.apply(lambda row: row["q18154"] == "26", axis=1)

   ca_test.q255 = pd.Series(ca_test.q255, dtype="int")
   ca_test.q255 = pd.Series(ca_test.q255, dtype="string")
   ca_test.resp_q255 = ca_test.apply(lambda row: row["q255"] == "89547", axis=1)

Now that we have the correct answer for each test question, let's add up each correct answer for each person. There are 14 questions, so the maximum score will also be 14.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   cognitive_score = ca_test[list(ca_test.filter(regex="^resp"))].sum(axis=1)
   ca_test["cognitive_score"] = cognitive_score

> How do we add up these responses? Remember that each answer was stored as a boolean (True or False) with the prefix "resp_". So we search in the ca_test dataframe for the answers of each column starting with "resp" (we use the regular expression ``regex="^resp"`` and the method ``filter``) and sum the True values of each row with ``sum(axis=1)``. Then we store these results in the "cognitive_score" column of the ca_test dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do we add up these responses? Remember that each answer was stored as a boolean (True or False) with the prefix "resp_". So we search in the ``ca_test`` dataframe for the answers of each column starting with "resp" (we use the regular expression ``regex="^resp"`` and the method ``filter``) and sum the True values of each row with ``sum(axis=1)``. Then we store these results in the "cognitive_score" column of the ``ca_test`` dataset.
```

You can see the results of these operations by typing in the IPython Console ``ca_test.cognitive_score.describe()``. If you do so, in *count* you will see that the new number of records has been reduced to 479 (the rest of the 68,371 users did not answer all of these questions).

Let's draw a histogram of this variable to see the frequency distribution.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   sns.histplot(ca_test.cognitive_score, kde=True, bins=6)
   sns.set_palette(palette)

.. image:: images/workshop-2/cognitive-score-histogram.png
   :alt: Cognitive test score histogram

As you can see, in this case the distribution is not symmetrical but has a long "tail" on the left (negatively skewed). This means that most of the users who answered all the questions did quite well, and that only a few users answered most of the questions in the wrong way.

================
Relate variables
================

Remember that the hypothesis relates two variables: religiosity and cognitive ability. The measurement of religiosity will be made from question q41 (categorical or qualitative variable) and cognitive ability will be measured from the sum of the correct answers on the test (quantitative interval variable). With this type of variable we can make some box plots to see if there are differences between the means.

But first, let's change the standard Seaborn palette, to get prettier plots.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   palette = sns.color_palette("husl")
   sns.palplot(palette)

.. note::

   Seaborn allows you to choose from different styles of graphics and color palettes. More information is available at https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial/color_palettes.html

Now, we are going to create box plots to observe the relationship between variables. To do this, we will use the ``catplot`` class of Seaborn. The first argument will be the x-axis, which in this case will be the qualitative variable (question q41). The second argument will be the y-axis, on which we will place the quantitative variable (cognitive score). With the parameter ``kind`` we indicate that it is a box plot. The parameters ``height`` and ``aspect`` regulate the appearance of the graph. The last parameter, ``data``, indicates where the data comes from.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   An outlier is a value that is very different from the rest of the data values. They must be taken into account because they can often create a bias in the model we are trying to fit to the data.

The figure shows that the extreme values of religiosity present very different results (second and fourth boxes). The mean of the atheists in the cognitive ability test is significantly higher than the mean of the most religious people. The dispersion of values in the second box is narrower (consistent) than the dispersion in the fourth box. In fact, the median score obtained by the very religious people is below the lower boundary of the interquartile of the atheists/agnostics. This means that those who stated that religion was not important to them scored better on the questions that make up our cognitive skills test. This seems to support our initial hypothesis.

To appreciate in context the real difference in the averages, let's create some bar charts. We are now going to use Seaborn's barplot class. On the x-axis we put again the qualitative variable (q41) and on the y-axis the quantitative variable (cognitive_score). The data parameter takes as argument the entire dataset.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

How does ANOVA work? This analysis tells us whether three or more means are equal. If so, this would support the null hypothesis.

.. note::

   The *null hypothesis* is an alternative prediction to the one we have stated in our hypothesis. The null hypothesis simply states that the observed differences in means are due to random variations that occur when samples are collected.

An ANOVA produces an *F-ratio* (also called F-statistic) that compares the amount of systematic variation in the data (variation that can be explained by the model or hypothesis) with the amount of unsystematic variance (variation that cannot be explained by our hypothesis or model). This means that F is the ratio of the model to its error. ANOVA also produces a *p-value* that indicates the probability that the variation can be attributed to the null hypothesis.

To perform an ANOVA, let's start by pivoting the dataset with the cognitive ability test results. The religiosity values will now be the column names, and each row will represent a person.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   relig_pivot = ca_test.pivot(columns="q41", values="cognitive_score")

You will see that one of the columns includes the answers to the test made by people who did not specify their feelings towards religion. Let's delete that column.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   relig_pivot.drop(relig_pivot.columns[0], axis=1, inplace=True)

.. image:: images/workshop-2/religiosity-pivot-table.png
   :alt: Religiosity pivot table for ANOVA analysis.

Now let's rename the column names (for simplicity) and remove the records that have missing values (with ``dropna``). The argument ``inplace=True`` allows you to directly modify a dataframe without having to create a new one.

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   relig_col_names = list(relig_pivot.columns)
   relig_pivot.columns = ["A", "B", "C", "D"]
   relig_pivot.dropna(how="all", inplace=True)

.. note::

   In the variable ``religiosity_col_names`` we have stored the names of the values in order. This implies that

   A = Extremely important
   B = Not at all important
   C = Not very important
   D = Somewhat important

To perform ANOVA, we are going to use a Python library called "stats", in particular the f_oneway function. You can find more information about this library by typing ``stats`` in the Help Pane. And if you want to learn more about the function we are going to use, type ``stats.f_oneway`` in the Help Pane:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/help-pane-for-stats.f_oneway.png
   :alt: stats.f_oneway() help in Spyder's Help Pane

The help notes that this function requires that you pass, as an array-like, the measurements for each group (in our case, one sample for A, one for B, one for C, and one for D). Since we have empty cells in each column, let's remove them from each column (the f_oneway function does not support missing values).

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

   relig_anova = [relig_pivot[col].dropna() for col in relig_pivot]

In the above line of code we are creating a list with 4 elements: the test results of each column A, B, C and D, without the missing values (they are removed with ``dropna()``).

Now, let's run ANOVA and store the output in two variables: ``relig_fvalue`` and ``relig_pvalue``. Notice that since ``relig_anova`` is a list, we must pass the argument with an asterisk (``*relig_anova``).

> .. code-block: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

Scientific Computing and Visualization with Spyder
##################################################

> This workshop is a tour of the features that make Spyder an ideal IDE for using the scientific tools offered by Python. Throughout the workshop, we will apply the scientific method to answer some questions related to our preferences and cognitive abilities.

Reviewer 2: I think the workshop is not a tour. So maybe something like: This workshop allows you to explore some of Spyder's tools for Scientific computing?

=============
Prerequisites
=============

> To follow this workshop we recommend that you have a basic knowledge of Python. You can visit `The Python Tutorial`_ to learn the basics of this programming language or to refresh your knowledge of Python.

Reviewer 2: I'm not quite sure but I think it should be "some basic knowledge" but perhaps Melissa can correct me if I'm wrong. 
Also I would remove "or to refresh your knowledge of Python." to avoid repetition.

.. _The Python Tutorial: https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/

> You will also need to have Spyder installed. More information about installation in :doc:`installation guide<../installation>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will also need to have Spyder installed. Visit our :doc:`installation guide<../installation>` for more information.
```

==============
Learning goals
==============

After completing this workshop, you should be able to:

* Apply the scientific method to answer questions related to psychometric variables
* Understand how to use Spyder's built-in scientific computing tools

===============
Learner profile
===============

This workshop is intended for people who want to learn how to answer questions scientifically from a dataset. We have also designed it to serve as a tutorial for learning how to use Spyder as a research tool.

===============
Prior knowledge
===============

* Basic level of Python
* Intermediate level of Statistics (`hypothesis testing`_ , `ANOVA`_, `correlation`_)
  
.. _hypothesis testing: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_hypothesis_testing
.. _ANOVA: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analysis_of_variance
.. _correlation: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Correlation_and_dependence

=====
Intro
=====

In this workshop we will explore a data set and use it to answer some questions using the scientific method.

Why do scientific research with Python?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Python is a mature programming language that has been chosen by much of the scientific community to support the research process. And there are a few reasons for this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python is a mature programming language that has been chosen by much of the scientific community to support the research process. There are a few reasons for this:
```

   
Download the dataset
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
   
We are going to work with a public dataset called OKCupid, collected by Kirkegaard and Bjerrekaer. The dataset is composed of 68,371 records and 2,626 variables.

Download the dataset here [enter missing link]

Setting up the working directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
   
The virtual environment and the data file are now ready. The only thing that remains is to create a directory to work in. In your operating system, create a new directory with the name of your choice. Then copy and unzip the dataset file there.

Here is an example (on Linux or macOS).
   
.. code-block:: bash
   
   mkdir spyder-for-research
   cd spyder-for-research
   
Keep in mind that in this new directory you must have the data file unzipped.
   
Launch Spyder:
   
.. code-block:: bash
      
   spyder

Let's make sure Spyder is ready. First, check that the working directory is correct. You should see in the upper right corner the path to the directory where you have the dataset. Something like this:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/working-directory.png
   :alt: Spyder's Working Directory plugin showing the working directory of spyder-research

> Second, let's check that the virtual environment we created is enabled in Spyder. Go into Preferences > Python interpreter, and under "Use the following Python interpreter" add the path to your virtual environment. You should see something like this:

Author: ok!

.. code-block:: python

   data.d_religion_seriosity.value_counts()

   # but not too serious about it     11142
   # and laughing about it             7307
   # and somewhat serious about it     5372
   # and very serious about it         3290
   # Name: d_religion_seriosity, dtype: int64

In addition to demographic and profile variables, the dataset includes responses to questions on a variety of topics. These questions are coded with a prefix "q" followed by an integer. The text of the questions is stored in a file called "question_data.csv" (which you can download here). [ADD LINK TO DOWNLOAD question_data.csv]

We can examine this file in the Variable Explorer.

.. code-block:: python

   question_data = pd.read_csv("question_data.csv", sep=";")

Double click on "question_data" in the Variable Explorer to display each question aligned with its code ("q" + number).

Now that we have learned how to explore the data we can ask interesting questions and try to answer them with the help of the dataset and Spyder.

=====================================
Think of a theory. Write a hypothesis
=====================================

> A theory is nothing more than an explanation of something. For example, we might suppose that a person's religiosity might be related to his or her ability to solve practical or abstract problems. To test the support of a theory, one can make a prediction based on it and see how this prediction behaves in an experiment or a concrete situation. We call this prediction a hypothesis.

Author: Fixed!

.. image:: images/workshop-2/religiosity-pivot-table.png
   :alt: Religiosity pivot table for ANOVA analysis.

Now let's rename the column names (for simplicity) and remove the records that have missing values (with ``dropna``). The argument ``inplace=True`` allows you to directly modify a dataframe without having to create a new one.

.. code-block:: python

   relig_col_names = list(relig_pivot.columns)
   relig_pivot.columns = ["A", "B", "C", "D"]
   relig_pivot.dropna(how="all", inplace=True)

.. note::

   In the variable ``religiosity_col_names`` we have stored the names of the values in order. This implies that

   A = Extremely important
   B = Not at all important
   C = Not very important
   D = Somewhat important

To perform ANOVA, we are going to use a Python library called "stats", in particular the f_oneway function. You can find more information about this library by typing ``stats`` in the Help Pane. And if you want to learn more about the function we are going to use, type ``stats.f_oneway`` in the Help pane:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/help-pane-for-stats.f_oneway.png
   :alt: stats.f_oneway() help in Spyder's Help pane

> The help notes that this function requires that you pass, as an array-like, the measurements for each group (in our case, one sample for A, one for B, one for C, and one for D). Since we have empty cells in each column, let's remove them from each column (the f_oneway function does not support missing values).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The help notes that this function requires an array-like with the measurements for each group as an input (in our case, one sample for A, one for B, one for C, and one for D). Since we have empty cells in each column, let's remove them from each column (the ``f_oneway`` function does not support missing values).
```

.. code-block:: python

   relig_samples = [relig_pivot[col].dropna() for col in relig_pivot]

In the above line of code we are creating a list with 4 elements: the test results of each column A, B, C, and D, without the missing values (they are removed with ``dropna()``).

Now, let's run ANOVA and store the output in two variables: ``relig_fvalue`` and ``relig_pvalue``. Notice that since ``relig_samples`` is a list, we must pass the argument with an asterisk (``*relig_samples``).

.. code-block:: python

   relig_fvalue, relig_pvalue = stats.f_oneway(*relig_samples)

> With the help of stats.f_oneway in the Help Pane you can read a description of the output of this function, some interesting notes about the test, and some references that you can use to better understand the nature of this analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the help of ``stats.f_oneway`` in the Help Pane you can read a description of the output of this function, some interesting notes about the test, and some references that you can use to better understand the nature of this analysis.
```

.. important::

>    In the Help component you will read that ANOVA requires certain assumptions to be satisfied. In this workshop we have not checked those assumptions because our goal is merely to show some Spyder functions that make the research work easier. Thus, the results obtained in this example with ANOVA should not be taken too rigorously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In the Help pane you will read that ANOVA requires certain assumptions to be satisfied. In this workshop we have not checked those assumptions because our goal is merely to show some Spyder functions that make the research work easier. Thus, the results obtained in this example with ANOVA should not be taken too rigorously.
```

In the Variable Explorer you can find these two new variables: ``f_value`` and ``p_value``. ``p_value`` is very small (1.9547062090036804e-05), which weakens the null hypothesis (this gives support to our hypothesis). To know if the F value obtained (8.38) is greater than the theoretically expected value, a **F critical value** must be calculated. This can be estimated using the stats library, a significance level (*q*), and the degrees of freedom (*df*) for the number of groups and the number of observations:

.. code-block:: python

   num_groups = len(relig_pivot.columns)
   num_observations = len(relig_pivot)
   dfn = num_groups - 1
   dfd = num_observations - num_groups

   f_critical = stats.f.ppf(q=0.05, dfn=dfn, dfd=dfd)

The value of ``f_critical`` (0.117) is much lower than that of ``f_value``, which confirms that the differences are statistically significant.

> What is the conclusion of all this? There seems to be evidence in our data to think that there is indeed a correlation between a person's religiosity and his or her ability to solve practical or abstract problems. This does not mean that there is a cause-and-effect relationship between the two, but simply that they are related in some way.

Reviewer 2: I would add a subsection here.

===========
The dataset
===========

OKCupid is a dataset that gathers information obtained from the online dating site OKCupid. It consists of 68,371 records collected automatically employing a scraper that extracted public information.

The dataset contains demographic data (such as gender, sexual orientation, age, etc.) It also includes answers to general questions used by the website's algorithm to calculate some personality indicators to help find compatible matches.

If you want more information about how this dataset was collected and what kind of information it contains you can get it in this paper: `The OKCupid dataset`_.

.. _The OKCupid dataset: https://doi.org/10.26775/ODP.2016.11.03

To get started, import the libraries.

.. important:: 

   Write and run all code for this workshop in the "IPython Console" at the bottom left of Spyder.

.. code-block:: python
      
   import scipy.stats as stats
   import numpy as np
   import pandas as pd
   
   import seaborn as sns
   from pylab import mpl
   import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Load raw data (in format CSV):

.. code-block:: python

   data = pd.read_csv("parsed_data_public.csv", low_memory=False)

> You can save them in parquet format (the file is smaller and loads faster):

Author: No. I'll fix that.

An ANOVA produces an *F-ratio* (also called F-statistic) that compares the amount of systematic variation in the data (variation that can be explained by the model or hypothesis) with the amount of unsystematic variance (variation that cannot be explained by our hypothesis or model). This means that F is the ratio of the model to its error. ANOVA also produces a *p-value* that indicates the probability that the variation can be attributed to the null hypothesis. The smaller the p-value, the less likely it is that the observed variation is due to chance.

To perform an ANOVA, let's start by pivoting the dataset with the cognitive ability test results. The pet preferences values will now be the column names, and each row will represent a person.

.. code-block:: python

   dog_or_cat_pivot = ca_test.pivot(columns="q997", values="cognitive_score")

You will see that one of the columns includes the answers to the test made by people who did not specify their preferences towards pets. Let's delete that column.

.. code-block:: python

   dog_or_cat_pivot.drop(dog_or_cat_pivot.columns[0], axis=1, inplace=True)

> .. image:: images/workshop-2/pets-preferences-pivot-table

Reviewer: I think the extension of the file is missing here (`.png`)

Reviewer 2: Yeap the image is not working properly

.. important::

   In the Help component you will read that ANOVA requires certain assumptions to be satisfied. In this workshop we have not checked those assumptions because our goal is merely to show some Spyder functions that make the research work easier. Thus, the results obtained in this example with ANOVA should not be taken too rigorously.

In the Variable Explorer you can find these two new variables: ``f_value`` and ``p_value``. ``p_value`` (0.6275) is well over 0.05 , which gives support to the null hypothesis (detracting support from our hypothesis). To know if the F value obtained is greater than the theoretically expected value, a **F critical value** must be calculated. This can be estimated using the stats library, a significance level (*q*), and the degrees of freedom (*df*) for the number of groups and the number of observations:

.. code-block:: python

   num_groups = len(dog_or_cat_pivot.columns)
   num_observations = len(dog_or_cat_pivot)
   dfn = num_groups - 1
   dfd = num_observations - num_groups

   f_critical = stats.f.ppf(q=0.05, dfn=dfn, dfd=dfd)

> The value of ``f_critical`` (0.1172) is lower than that of ``f_value`` (0.5813). This means that the variance between the means of these groups is significantly different. But since the P-value indicates that we cannot rule out random variations, then we have to discard our hypothesis.

Reviewer: Should "p-value" be consistent with respect to capitalization? If so, 

```suggestion
The value of ``f_critical`` (0.1172) is lower than that of ``f_value`` (0.5813). This means that the variance between the means of these groups is significantly different. But since the p-value indicates that we cannot rule out random variations, then we have to discard our hypothesis.
```

What is the conclusion of all this? There seems to be little or no evidence in our data to think that there is indeed a correlation between a person's pet preferences and his or her ability to solve practical or abstract problems.

================
Report and share
================

In science, sharing results, good and bad, is critical. Today, in scientific computing, it is also crucial to share data, and the code used to process and analyze it. To help with this, Spyder has two tools: Code Analysis and spyder-notebook.

Code Analysis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you share code, you want it to be readable, clean, and not overly complex. The Code Analysis component can help us detect these issues and even bugs that can affect the performance of our code.

> To see an example, you can open the spyder_workshop_2_astro.py file and run the Code Analysis (open the file in the pane and click on the green triangular button in the upper right corner).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see an example, you can open the ``spyder_workshop_2_astro.py`` file and run the Code Analysis (open the file in the pane and click on the green triangular button in the upper right corner).
```

You can see the results of these operations by typing in the IPython Console ``ca_test.cognitive_score.describe()``. If you do so, in *count* you will see that the new number of records has been reduced to 479 (the rest of the 68,371 users did not answer all of these questions).

Let's draw a histogram of this variable to see the frequency distribution.

.. code-block:: python

   sns.histplot(ca_test.cognitive_score, kde=True, bins=6)
   sns.set_palette(palette)

.. image:: images/workshop-2/cognitive-score-histogram.png
   :alt: Cognitive test score histogram

As you can see, in this case, the distribution is not symmetrical but has a long "tail" on the left (negatively skewed). This means that most of the users who answered all the questions did quite well and that only a few users answered most of the questions in the wrong way.

================
Relate variables
================

> Remember that the hypothesis relates two variables: which pet do you prefer and cognitive ability. The measurement of pet preferences will be made from question q997 (categorical or qualitative variable) and cognitive ability will be measured from the sum of the correct answers on the test (quantitative interval variable). With this type of variable we can make some box plots to see if there are differences between the means.

Reviewer 2: Here again add bold to the question number

But first, let's change the standard Seaborn palette, to get prettier plots.

.. code-block:: python

   palette = sns.color_palette("husl")
   sns.palplot(palette)

.. note::

   Seaborn allows you to choose from different styles of graphics and color palettes. More information is available at https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial/color_palettes.html

> Now, we are going to create box plots to observe the relationship between variables. To do this, we will use the ``catplot`` class of Seaborn. The first argument will be the x-axis, which in this case will be the qualitative variable (question q997). The second argument will be the y-axis, on which we will place the quantitative variable (cognitive score). With the parameter ``kind`` we indicate that it is a box plot. The parameters ``height`` and ``aspect`` regulate the appearance of the graph. The last parameter, ``data``, indicates where the data comes from.

Reviewer 2: Bold to question number

> Now, we are going to create box plots to observe the relationship between variables. To do this, we will use the ``catplot`` class of Seaborn. The first argument will be the x-axis, which in this case will be the qualitative variable (question q997). The second argument will be the y-axis, on which we will place the quantitative variable (cognitive score). With the parameter ``kind`` we indicate that it is a box plot. The parameters ``height`` and ``aspect`` regulate the appearance of the graph. The last parameter, ``data``, indicates where the data comes from.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to create box plots to observe the relationship between variables. To do this, we will use the ``catplot`` class of Seaborn. The first argument will be the x-axis, which in this case will be the qualitative variable (question q997). The second argument will be the y-axis, where we will place the quantitative variable (cognitive score). With the parameter ``kind`` we indicate that it is a box plot. The parameters ``height`` and ``aspect`` regulate the appearance of the graph. The last parameter, ``data``, indicates where the data comes from.
```

   sns.catplot(x=ca_test.q997, y=ca_test.cognitive_score,
   kind="box", height=5, aspect=2, data=ca_test).set_axis_labels("q997 = Are you a cat person or a dog person?", "cognitive score")
   sns.set_palette(palette)

.. image:: images/workshop-2/pet-preferences-cognitive-score-boxplot.png
   :alt: Pet preferences and cognitive score relationship (boxplot)

Box plots or box-whisker diagrams display, near the center of the box, the **mean** of the data as a horizontal line. The lines bordering the box represent **50% of the observations** (*interquartile range*). Outside the box, upwards and downwards, we find two whiskers: the lower one represents the **mean of the values in the lower part of the dataset**, and the upper one represents the **mean of the values in the upper part of the dataset**. The points beyond the whiskers are **outliers**.

.. important::

   An outlier is a value that is very different from the rest of the data values. They must be taken into account because they can often create a bias in the model we are trying to fit to the data.

The graph shows four boxes measuring cognitive ability for the following groups:

1. Those who prefer dogs

> 2. Those who define themselves as cat people and dog people indistinctly 3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Those who define themselves as cat people and dog people indistinctly. 
```
Typo?

.. code-block:: python

   num_groups = len(dog_or_cat_pivot.columns)
   num_observations = len(dog_or_cat_pivot)
   dfn = num_groups - 1
   dfd = num_observations - num_groups

   f_critical = stats.f.ppf(q=0.95, dfn=dfn, dfd=dfd)

The value of ``f_critical`` (2.6241) is larger than that of ``f_value`` (0.5813). This means that the variance between the means of these groups is not significantly different. Since the *p* value indicates that we cannot rule out random variations, then we have to discard our hypothesis.

What is the conclusion of all this? There seems to be little or no evidence in our data to think that there is indeed a correlation between a person's pet preferences and his or her ability to solve practical or abstract problems. Cat and dog owners, rejoice!

================
Report and share
================

> In science, sharing results, good and bad, is critical. Today, in scientific computing, it is also crucial to share data, and the code used to process and analyze it. To help with this, Spyder has two tools: Code Analysis and spyder-notebook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In science, sharing results, good and bad, is critical. Today, in scientific computing, it is also crucial to share data, and the code used to process and analyze it. To help with this, we will use Spyder's Code Analysis.
```
We are not using the notebook anymore

These suggestions can contribute to sharing clean code. We recommend using this panel to polish your code before publishing it.
   

===========
Final words
===========

In this workshop we have taken the first steps to use Spyder for scientific computing. We have seen how from a question or doubt a hypothesis is raised. This question can also emerge from the exploration of some data. This exploration can be done by calculating some measures (such as mean, median, standard deviation) or by drawing some plots.

Often, in order to answer the question, we must process some data (for example, for the construction of a cognitive ability test).

Finally, we try to establish a relationship between variables with some statistical tests. The results of these tests will support or not our initial hypothesis.

Spyder has many features that can help you do data analysis. You can find more information in our `official documentation <https://docs.spyder-ide.org/5/index.html>`_.

> Also, if you are interested in an introduction to financial analysis with Spyder, you can visit the workshop :doc:`Financial Data Analysis with Spyder<../workshops/financial>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, if you are interested in an introduction to financial analysis with Spyder, you can visit the workshop :doc:`Financial Data Analysis with Spyder<../workshops/financial>`.
```
I would put this at the end of this section since this takes them away from this workshop.

> If you want to check what you have learned, I suggest you analyze the data to try to answer the following question: *Do the different zodiac signs influence the results of a cognitive ability test?* You can check the Python script ``spyder_workshop_2_astro.py`` if you have any doubts.

Reviewer 2: For this part you can put something like "Homework" to make it more appealing.

================
Preparation work
================

Before starting, you must have installed some packages and libraries needed to run the code. We recommend you to install these requirements in a virtual environment. Here we explain step by step how to do it.

Setting up the Conda environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you would like to have Spyder in a dedicated environment to update it separately from your other packages and avoid any conflicts, you can.

You can set up your environment in two different ways.

.. important::

   We recommend creating the virtual environment with `Anaconda <https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual>`_ (or `Miniconda <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`_) as it integrates seamlessly with Spyder. You can find installation instructions in `Anaconda documentation`_.

   .. _Anaconda documentation: https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/

> With commands

Author: In the conda doc they call this "with commands". I will put the number to make it clearer.

Here is an example (on Linux or macOS):
   
.. code-block:: bash
   
   $ mkdir scientific-computing
   $ cd scientific-computing
   
Keep in mind that in this new directory you must have the data file unzipped.
   
Launch Spyder:
   
.. code-block:: bash
      
   $ spyder

Let's make sure Spyder is ready. First, check that the working directory is correct. You should see in the upper right corner the path to the directory where you have the dataset. Something like this:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/working-directory.png
   :alt: Spyder's Working Directory plugin showing the working directory of spyder-scientific

Second, let's check that the virtual environment we created is enabled in Spyder. Go to :guilabel:`Preferences` > :guilabel:`Python interpreter`, and use the dropdown under :guilabel:`Use the following Python interpreter` to select the path to your virtual environment. You should see something like this:

.. image:: images/workshop-2/set-up-environment.png
   :alt: Set up environment in Spyder's Preferences

Now, you have everything ready to proceed with the workshop.

Download the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Although the workshop is designed for you to write the code in the IPython Console, we have created a file that you can download :download:`here <scientific-computing.py>`. This script provides all the code you will write in this workshop, and you can use it as a guide if you get lost.

Author: It was an inconsistency in the script name. I have corrected it.

.. code-block:: python

   dog_or_cat_samples = [dog_or_cat_pivot[col].dropna() for col in dog_or_cat_pivot]

In the above line of code we are creating a list with 4 elements: the test results of each column A, B, C, and D, without the missing values (they are removed with ``dropna()``).

Run ANOVA
~~~~~~~~~

Now, let's run ANOVA and store the output in two variables: ``f_value`` and ``p_value``. Notice that since ``dog_or_cat_samples`` is a list, we must pass the argument with an asterisk (``*dog_or_cat_samples``).

.. code-block:: python

   f_value, p_value = stats.f_oneway(*dog_or_cat_samples)

With the help of ``stats.f_oneway`` in the Help Pane you can read a description of the output of this function, some interesting notes about the test, and some references that you can use to better understand the nature of this analysis.

.. important::

   In the Help pane you will read that ANOVA requires certain assumptions to be satisfied. In this workshop we have not checked those assumptions because our goal is merely to show some Spyder functions that make the research work easier. Thus, the results obtained in this example with ANOVA should not be taken too rigorously.

> In the Variable Explorer you can find these two new variables: ``f_value`` and ``p_value``. ``p_value`` (0.6275) is well over 0.05 , which gives support to the null hypothesis (detracting support from our hypothesis). To know if the F value obtained is greater than the theoretically expected value, a **F critical value** must be calculated. This can be estimated using the ``stats`` library, a significance level (*q* ), and the degrees of freedom (*df* ) for the number of groups and the number of observations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Variable Explorer you can find these two new variables: ``f_value`` and ``p_value``. ``p_value`` (0.6275) is well over 0.05, which gives support to the null hypothesis (detracting support from our hypothesis). To know if the F value obtained is greater than the theoretically expected value, a **F critical value** must be calculated. This can be estimated using the ``stats`` library, a significance level (*q* ), and the degrees of freedom (*df* ) for the number of groups and the number of observations:
```

To see an example, you can open the :download:`scientific-computing-astro.py <scientific-computing-astro.py>` file and run the :guilabel:`Code Analysis` (open the file in the pane and click on the green triangular button in the upper right corner).

.. image:: images/workshop-2/code-analysis-pane-workshop-2.png
   :alt: Code Analysis pane Example for astrological sign and cognitive ability

You can see four categories that can help you improve your code:

* Convention: programming standard violations
* Refactor: refactoring related checks
* Warning: Python-specific problems
* Error: probable bugs in the code

Each of these categories indicates the type of alert and the line on which the potential issue occurs. For example, it tells us that line 129 is too long, or that we imported numpy but did not use it at all in the code.

These suggestions can contribute to sharing clean code. We recommend using this panel to polish your code before publishing it.
   

===========
Final words
===========

> In this workshop we have taken the first steps to use Spyder for scientific computing. We have seen how from a question or doubt a hypothesis is raised. This question can also emerge from the exploration of some data. This exploration can be done by calculating some measures (such as mean, median, standard deviation) or by drawing some plots.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this workshop we have taken the first steps to use Spyder for scientific computing. We have seen how from a question or doubt a hypothesis is raised. This question can also emerge from the exploration of some data, which can be done by calculating some measures (such as mean, median, standard deviation) or by drawing some plots.
```

Often, in order to answer the question, we must process some data (for example, for the construction of a cognitive ability test).

Finally, we try to establish a relationship between variables with some statistical tests. The results of these tests will support or not our initial hypothesis.

> In this workshop you have learned how to:

Reviewer 2: I would add a title on top of this. Something like "What we learned".
```suggestion
In this workshop we have learned how to:
```
Also use we instead of you since all the workshop has this kind of language.

- Write and test code with the IPython Console.
- Browse between plots using the Plots pane.
- Inspect objects in the Variable Explorer.

> - Set up a Conda environment.

Reviewer 2: This should probably be top of the list

- Improve code readability with Code Analysis.
- Download a dataset.
- Graphically explore a dataset.
- Explore data and relate it to a hypothesis.
- Manipulate data in a Pandas DataFrame.
- Perform a statistical test with a specialized library on the data.

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest ordering this list in the order that the things are happening in the workshop so it is better for users to remember the sections they went through while reading these learning points.

Spyder has many features that can help you do data analysis. You can find more information in our `official documentation <https://docs.spyder-ide.org/5/index.html>`_.

> Thank you for reaaching the end of this workshop! We hope you found it helpful and informative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank you for reaching the end of this workshop! We hope you found it helpful and informative.
```
